# Lesson Setup Instructions Task Force Recommendations
Author: Toby Hodges, task force chair

## Relevant Links

* [Task Force Charter](https://github.com/carpentries/task-forces/blob/main/2024/lesson-setup/lesson-setup-instructions.md)

## Recommendation 1: Update shell instructions to recommend Windows Subsystem Linux
[Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL 2)](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/about) is a complete Ubuntu Linux environment, accessible on systems running Windows versions ≥10. WSL was first released in 2016 and the current version, WSL 2, which introduced a full Linux kernel, followed in 2020.  
While Git Bash (our current recommended approach) emulates a shell environment in Windows, WSL 2 provides an authentic and complete Linux kernel and environment alongside the Windows operating system, with its own dedicated filesystem and access to the files and folders from “the Windows side” as well.  
Although members of the task force acknowledged that setting up WSL 2 is likely to feel more intimidating for novice learners than the installation of Git for Windows, the group concluded that these drawbacks were compensated by the increased flexibility and power offered to learners by a full Linux environment, especially after a workshop.   
Concerns were also raised about the relative novelty of WSL, in the context of learners often needing to access lessons on outdated systems running older Windows versions. Although [Microsoft will stop supporting Windows 10 in October 2025](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/end-of-support), we are aware that learners often need to join workshops using computers administered by their employer. In some cases, these managed systems may be using older Windows operating systems or the local IT department may be reluctant to activate WSL 2.  
Considering all of this, **the task force recommends that WSL 2 becomes the *preferred* method for accessing the Unix shell in Windows** for lessons. Since some learners and Instructors will not be able to access WSL 2 on their Windows systems, we will continue to support Git for Windows as a backup option. Acknowledging that versions of Windows that can support WSL 2 are well established and previous versions are becoming unsupported, **the task force recommends that The Carpentries re-evaluates support for Git for Windows again in 2027**. 

## Recommendation 2: Continue using RStudio for now, but monitor development of Positron
The task force noted the ongoing development of [Positron](https://positron.posit.co/), a relatively new (in beta testing) integrated development environment (IDE) from Posit. Posit also produces RStudio, the IDE currently used in Carpentries lessons that use R.  
Although RStudio supports both R and Python, Positron offers expanded support for Python development including rendering Jupyter Notebooks. It is expected to offer comprehensive support for Quarto in future, which may benefit many learners attending Carpentries workshops.  
However, with Positron still in early development, task force members did not feel that it was yet ready for adoption as a preferred IDE in lessons. For now, **the task force recommends that R Studio continues to be used for lessons teaching with R**. The Curriculum Team will revisit this as the software is developed and consider recommending Positron as an IDE for R and Python lessons (related to recommendation 4).

## Recommendation 3: Update Python instructions to use miniforge
The task force considered a wide range of options for installing Python for lessons, from the currently used option, Anaconda, through a “vanilla” installation from [python.org with an environment managed with `pip`](https://www.python.org/downloads/), to [JupyterLab Desktop](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab-desktop).  
No clear “favourite” emerged among the various options considered by the task force. However, the option of continuing to use Anaconda was discounted, due to concerns that learners could inadvertently breach its terms of service by installing packages from the default channel when they continue to use Python after a workshop. Members of the task force also reported a loss of trust in Anaconda, Inc, following the sudden change of the ToS, enforcement actions, and associated communications in 2024.  
It was difficult to choose between several of the remaining options, but ultimately **the task force recommends [miniforge](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge?tab=readme-ov-file#miniforge) for use in Python lessons**. The distribution is set up to use conda-forge by default, eliminating concerns about learners contravening Anaconda’s terms of service after a workshop, and teaching learners the basics of how to use conda for environment management (see recommendation 5) will help learners from a wide range of disciplines continue to use their setup from a workshop long after the event has finished.   
“Vanilla” Python and pip scored similarly highly to miniforge in the task force’s assessment, but ultimately the group chose a conda-based solution due to the relative ease of its adoption: since Python lessons currently use Anaconda, several lessons already use conda for additional setup steps.  
The use of miniforge should not force Instructors to change the way that they teach Python in workshops, e.g. those Instructors who prefer to teach with Jupyter Notebooks can continue to do so. However, as discussed in Recommendation 4, instructions will be added for learners to set up an IDE before joining Python lessons.  
The shift away from Anaconda has additional implications, beyond the need for installation instructions to be updated. Recommendation 5 describes how this change will impact the content of Python lessons for novices.

## Recommendation 4: Add instructions to install VS Codium/VS Code for Python lessons
As mentioned in Recommendation 2, R lessons have been taught with RStudio for many years already, and **the task force recommends that The Carpentries Instructor community considers teaching Python with an IDE** too. Although some changes would be required across the lessons, the group felt that teaching Python in an IDE would reflect common modern practice, and was excited by the possibilities it opens for using the same interface to teach all lessons in a workshop (e.g. Unix shell, Python, and Git within the IDE in a Software Carpentry workshop).

Although the Curriculum Team will consider adopting Positron for this purpose at a later date (see recommendation 2), for now the task force **recommends implementing instructions to setup VS Codium for Python lessons**, accompanied by a brief explanation of the difference between the “pure open source” [VS Codium](https://vscodium.com/) and the more widely-used [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/), with setup instructions for VS Code provided as well for those who prefer to use it. 

The task force is aware that some lessons (e.g. [Data Carpentry: Image Processing with Python](https://datacarpentry.github.io/image-processing/instructor/instructor-notes.html#working-with-jupyter-notebooks)) are designed to be taught with Jupyter, and the setup instructions for these lessons will not be changed to use an IDE. For those lessons where setup instructions are updated to include VS Codium/VS Code, members of the task force will suggest additional changes where needed to support this setup in the main lesson content.

## Recommendation 5: Teach the fundamentals of environment management in novice Python lessons
From a teaching perspective, one advantage of using the Anaconda distribution for Python lessons was the presence of a base environment that already included the majority of additional libraries required for our lessons. This reduced the number of steps required for learners to set up their systems to follow our lessons: in many cases, they were ready to get started as soon as they had installed Anaconda.

However, this feature of Anaconda also had its drawbacks: notably a large initial download size that represents a major accessibility challenge for learners and Instructors based in regions with slow, expensive and/or unreliable internet connections. Additionally, access to a base environment that already contains a wide range of different libraries can encourage novice learners to adopt bad practices in environment management. Instead of creating a fresh, minimal environment for each project, they may instead continue to use the base environment for everything, installing additional libraries as needed until eventually encountering a clash of version dependencies that cannot be resolved by conda (suboptimal conditions in which to learn about better environment management!).

The removal of Anaconda from the setup instructions for Carpentries lessons means that this large base environment will no longer be available. Instead, learners will need to create an environment and populate it with the required packages before they can follow a lesson. On one hand, this presents a new challenge for Instructors: to teach to novice learners the concepts and skills required to manage their Python environment (and find room for this in an already packed workshop schedule). On the other, teaching learners these basics will help us ensure that we set them up to succeed in the long term after they leave a workshop. Furthermore, if we wish to move away from using Anaconda as our preferred Python distribution, there are no viable alternatives that can provide a complete base environment on learners’ local systems.

**The task force recommends that Python lessons be updated to include a minimal discussion of environments and dependencies**. If you would like to contribute to discussions about exactly what these changes should look like, please watch out for relevant messages on the `#general` channel of The Carpentries Slack, or [contact the Curriculum Team](mailto:curriculum@carpentries.org).

